# Product Express API

This is a test project used to create an example API with the Node.js tool, TypeScript, in conjunction with Prisma (PostgreSQL).

# 🔨 Tools to install before running the API

- Install the latest version of [Node (LTS)](https://nodejs.org/en "Node (LTS)")
- Install any tool that allows you to read the code and execute it from a terminal (PowerShell can also be used)
- Install the latest version of [PostgreSQ](https://www.postgresql.org/ "PostgreSQ").
- Install [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads "Git") on your local machine, to clone the current repository.
- For testing Http requests, it is recommended to also install [Postman](https://www.postman.com/downloads/ "Postman"). Where the `products-express-ts.postman_collection.json` file will be executed.

# 👣 Installation steps
- #### Step 1: Create a new directory where you will clone the project, open a terminal positioned in that directory and run:
  `$ git clone https://github.com/Joseeli54/products-express-ts.git`
- #### Step 2: Redirect your location to that cloned folder from the terminal:
  `$ cd /path/to/products-express-ts`
- #### Step 3: Install the dependencies required for API execution:
  `$ npm install`
- #### Step 4: In the project directory this file `.env.example`, copy the file and name it `.env`. It can also be done from the terminal:
  `$ cp .env.example .env`

# ⚙️ Configuration of the .env file.

- `PORT`: The port to use to run the application in `development` or `production` mode. By default, port `3000` was established.
- `NODE_ENV`: This will configure the mode in which the API is located (`development` or `production`). By default is configured `development`.
- `JWT_SECRET`: In this variable, a random string of 32 characters is placed without using symbols. This can be generated with the following online tool: [Pinetools](https://pinetools.com/random-string-generator "Pinetools")
- `COOKIES_EXPIRES_HOURS`: Expiration time of the cookie generated by the JWT. It is configured by default 24 hours.

	### Additional

	A mail server was also configured that allows a message to be sent to the email of a user who registers or a user who is registered by an administrator.

- `MAIL_HOST`: Email host from where the shipment will be made, `gmail` is by default
- `MAIL_USERNAME`: Email that you want to use to send emails. By default there is an account created and configured specifically for this test project `productexpress099@gmail.com`.
- `MAIL_PASSWORD`: This is a password that will be generated in [Google's password manager](https://myaccount.google.com/apppasswords "Google's password manager"). Any Gmail account can set it up, as long as it has two-step authentication enabled. By default, an application password was generated and placed in this variable for the aforementioned account. Although any Google account can be configured this way.

	It is important to clarify that this setting does not affect the functionality of the project, and is only added as an additional feature. If the sending email is not compatible, or the email receiving the message does not exist, only a message will be printed in the console, indicating these facts.

# ⚙️ Configure Prisma and the PostgreSQL database

To configure the database you need to have PostgreSQL installed previously.
- Creation of the database in PostgreSQL (pgAdmin), with `UTF8` encoding from query tools.

  `CREATE DATABASE express_ts WITH ENCODING 'UTF8';`

-  In the `.env` file there is a variable called DATABASE_URL, here the url that will link to the Prisma tool is specified. `user` **(your username)**, `password` **(your password)**, `port` **(5432)** and `db_name` **(express_ts)** of the PostgreSQL driver must be specified.

    `DATABASE_URL="postgresql://user:password@localhost:port/db_name"`

- After specifying the handler data and the url, proceed to execute the following command to migrate the database tables with the help of Prisma ORM tool:

  `$ npx prisma migrate dev`

- The database is loaded with seeds data of test users and products for the development environment. (It is recommended not to use this in production, since some of the test users are administrators). Proceed to execute the following command:

  `$ npx prisma db seed`

# ▶️ Running Prisma Studio (optional)
- After migrating the tables and their data to `express_ts`, you can display the tables in Prisma Studio by executing the following command in the project folder:

  `$ npx prisma studio` 

  This will allow you to easily view user, product, and order records, as well as search, delete, or modify them for test cases. When you execute the command, the following path will open: `http://localhost:5555`

# ▶️ Running API in development mode
- To run the API in developer mode, you must execute the following command at the prompt:
  
  `$ npm run dev`
  
  Once this command is executed, a port will be opened to make HTTP requests. This port is configured in the `.env` file in the `PORT` variable. The generated route should be the following: `http://localhost:PORT`

# ▶️ Running Build on the API for generate production build.
- To create an optimized production build for this application, run the following command:

  `$ npm run build`

- A directory called `/dist` will be created, where the API will be executed in production mode.

# ▶️ Running API in production mode
- To run the application in production mode, execute the following command:

  `$ npm run prod`

  Once this command is executed, a port will be opened to make HTTP requests. This port is configured in the `.env` file in the `PORT` variable. The generated route should be the following: `http://localhost:PORT`

# 🧪 Running the tests in the API

- Run all the tests carried out to verify that the functionality is executed correctly:

  `$ npm run test`

- Run the unit tests in the `jest.unit.config.js` file

   `$ npm run test:unit`

  In both commands, the `PORT` variable was configured to be 0, because we are working in test mode.

# 🗎 Running the OpenAPI documentation with Swagger UI

- Firstly, the information must be prepared with the `definition.yaml` file, where the following command is executed: 

  `$ npm run schemas:openapi`

- Now, the project must be run in development mode:

  `$ npm run dev`

  Once the API is executed, you must enter the path `http://localhost:PORT/docs` to see the API document, whose `PORT` is the one configured in the `.env` file.

# ℹ️ Source code editor and compiler

- The Visual Studio Code text editor was used.
- Additionally, the Prisma extension was installed in the tool to improve the syntax format.
- The API was compiled, along with Prisma Studio and the tests within this source code editor.

# ℹ️ Installed dependencies

- Express.js: v4.19.2 or higher
- Prisma: v5.18.0 or higher
- Node.js: v20.11.1 or higher
- Jest: v29.7.0 or higher
- Typescript: v5.3.3 or higher
- PostgreSQL: v16.4 or higher
- Zod: v3.23.8 or higher
- npm: v6.14.10 or higher
- nodemailer: v6.9.14
